=== PAGE 1 ===
 
 
 
Essential Standard Operating Procedure 
(SOP) Required for Affiliation with CBSE  
Composite Science 
Laboratory 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CENTRAL BOARD OF SECONDARY EDUCATION   
=== PAGE 2 ===
 
1. Introduction: 
 
Laboratories aim to create opportunities to provide students with hands -on experience of laboratory  
experiments, which could bridge the gap between theoretical concepts and their application in everyday  
life. The laboratory performance is based on the idea  that science focuses on hands -on, minds -on 
observational activities and that these activities help students make connections between various scientific 
concepts and real-life experiences. If  students are to make use of any technology/ scientific skills in their  
classrooms, they  must learn to make  observations, formulate  hypotheses, conduct  experiments, collect  
data, use  appropriate tools, analyse  the data and interpret  the obtained results.  The  practicals  enable 
students to connect to other science areas, communicate the information effectively, and argue their 
conclusions logically. Students can learn these  skills if they can participate in various laboratory exercises. 
In the study of Science, practicals are given special consideration as they are necessary to stimulate  
creativity, curiosity and critical thinking among students. Moreover, practicals help increase  students' 
engagement, thus boosting their interest in the subject.  
 
School labs are an excellent place for students which help them enhance their learning by understanding 
the theoretical concepts of  science taught in classrooms. Well -designed laboratories make science 
experiments fun and help  students achieve good academic results. It helps to close the gap in the 
achievement of learning outcomes, and classroom transactions will shift towards competency -based 
learning and education. Hence, a well-equipped Science Laboratory is required in every school to: 
 Make learning Holistic, Integrated, Enjoyable, and Engaging 
 Develop conceptual understanding giving a strong emphasis on Experiential learning in all stages of 
science education to move toward Competency-focussed education. 
 Provide opportunities to students for hands-on learning to observe, experiment and innovate 
 Fulfill curricular expectations in a holistic manner 
 Create and facilitate a culture of research from the school level itself 
 Promote collaborative learning 
 
2. Curricular expectations 
 
At this stage learners are expected to: 
 Develop understanding of concepts, principles, theories, and laws governing the physical world, 
consistent with the stage of cognitive development. 
 Develop ability to acquire and use the methods and processes of science, such as observing,  
questioning, planning investigations, hypothesizing, collecting, analyzing and interpreting data, 
communicating explanations with evidences, justifying explanations, thinking critically to consider and 
evaluate alternative explanation, etc. 
 Conduct experiments, also involving quantitative measurements. 
 Appreciate how concepts of science evolve with time giving importance to its historical prospective. 
 Develop scientific temper (objectivity, critical thinking, freedom from fear and prejudice, etc.). 
 Nurture natural curiosity, aesthetic sense, and creativity. 
 Imbibe the values of honesty, integrity, cooperation, concern for life and preservation of environment. 
 Develop respect for human dignity and rights, equity and equality. 
=== PAGE 3 ===
 
3. Pedagogy of Science education as recommended by National Education Policy 2020: 
 
 Chapter 4 of NEP 2020 ‘Curriculum and Pedagogy in Schools: Learning Should be  Holistic, 
Integrated, Enjoyable, and Engaging’ has laid a wide emphasis on Experiential  learning in all stages 
of science education in Para 4.6. 
 Chapter 7 of NEP 2020 in Para 7.5 has mentioned the importance of well-equipped science 
laboratories for strong science education. 
 According to Para 12.1 Effective learning requires a comprehensive approach that involves 
appropriate curriculum, engaging pedagogy, continuous formative assessment, and adequate 
student support. The curriculum must be interesting and relevant, and updated  regularly to align 
with the latest knowledge requirements and to meet specified learning  outcomes which can be  
made possible by well-equipped science laboratories. 
 
To align with the recommendations of NEP and for the convenience and clarity of all stakeholders, CBSE 
has prepared SOPs for laying down the requirements for Composite Science Laboratory in schools. The 
present SOP also  illustrates adequately the safety ru les for students and instructions for teachers in this 
regard. The SOP also attempt to sensitize schools about proper management of waste generated during 
the practical exercise carried out by the students. It is hoped that the SOPs will be helpful for schools and 
students in adopting basic rules for safe behaviour and hygiene, to avoid accidents in the laboratory. 
 
4. Model Layout of Composite Science Laboratory 
  

=== PAGE 4 ===
 
5. Infrastructure needed for Composite Science Laboratory: 
 
Recommendations for Infrastructure  
 
S. No. Category / 
Materials needed Requirements 
1 Physical 
Infrastructure 
 Minimum Lab. Room size 600 Sq.ft. 
2 Storage    A separate room or cupboards within lab for consumables and 
non- consumables items in the lock and key mechanism, thus 
ensuring a safety, dust and vermin-free environment. 
3 Teaching 
facility  
 Preferably an intelligent board with an internet 
Facility or white / green board. 
4 Demonstration  
Table  
 The demonstration  table should also have a sink along with a 
water tap. In the laboratory, seats are  made available to the 
students, so students sit at the allotted place and note the 
instructions from the teacher. 
 40 seating facilities (lab stools) 
5 Display / Notice 
Board 
 Do’s & Don’ts/ rules for the laboratory use/ safety 
procedures 
 List of practical activities 
 Timetable- (laboratory timetable) 
 Emergency Contact numbers 
6 Gas/ heating  Preferably gas pipeline. (2 heating burners) 
7 Sink with Water 
supply 
 8 sinks with water supply 
8 Waste 
management 
 02 bins to be installed for    biodegradable and non - 
biodegradable waste. 
 Flammable chemicals bottles must be packed separately. Empty 
chemical bottles can be packed in cartons/sacks. Disposal must 
be sent to the Material Management Division of the school. 
9 Fire extinguisher  To be installed at a  prominent place within the laboratory or in 
the corridor outside the laboratory. 
10 Exhaust fans  2 in number 
11 Medical First Aid 
Kit 
 2 in number 
12 Heating facility  One Heater should  be available in the  lab to conduct Heat 
related experiments 
 
  
=== PAGE 5 ===
 
6. Minimum requirement of equipment / items for a Composite Science laboratory  
 
a) List of Non-Consumable Items (for a batch of 40 students): 
 
S. No Materials Required Requirement S. No Materials Required Requirement 
1 Assembled Microscope 10 26 Concave Lens 10 
2 Test Tubes 10 27 Separating Funnel 10 
3 Boiling Tubes 20 28 China Dish 10 
4 Beakers (100ml) 10 29 Petri Dish 10 
5 Beakers (500ml) 5 30 Needles  
(To keep the Coverslips) 
10 
6 Conical Flask 5 31 Laboratory Thermometer 10 
7 Tripod Stand 10 32 Spring Balance (0-250 gm) 4 
8 Wire Gauze 10 33 U-Shaped Magnet 5 
9 Filter Paper 10 Boxes 34 Specimens 20 
10 Assembling Box (Wooden 
Box for keeping Few 
Things) 
5 35 Permanent Slides 80 
11 Funnel (Small) (Both Glass 
and Plastic one) 
10+10 36 Pin Hole Camera 4 
12 Funnel (Big) (Both Glass 
and Plastic one) 
5+5 37 Kaleidoscope 5 
13 Spatula 20 38 Magnetic Compass 5 
14 Round Bottom Flask (Small) 5 39 Bar Magnet 10 
15 Laboratory Thermometer 10 40 Iron Fillings 4 Boxes 
16 Glass Rod 10 41 Iron Stand 4 
17 Droppers (Big+Small) 10+10 42 Thumb Pins 2 Box 
18 Deflagrating Spoon 5 43 Bunsen Burners To be 
attached to 
gas supply 
accordingly 
19 Plane Mirrors 10 44 Glass prism 4 
20 Stands for plane Mirrors 10 Pairs 45 Gas Jar 4 
21 Test Tube Holder 10 46 Pair of Tongs 5 
22 Scissors 4 47 Laptop/ Desktop Set 2 set up 
23 Charts for Display 15 48 Convex Mirror 10 
24 Portraits (as per choice) 20 49 Convex Lens 10 
25 Concave Mirror 10 
  
=== PAGE 6 ===
 
b) List of Consumable Items (for a batch of 40 students at any given time): 
 
S. No Materials Required Requirement 
1 Hand Wash 2 Bottles 
2 Hand Sanitizer 2 Bottles 
3 Iodine Solution 200 ml 
4 Copper Sulphate 200 gm 
5 Sodium Hydroxide pallets 200 gm 
6 Matchboxes 3 
7 Slides 10 Boxes 
8 Cover Slips 10 Boxes 
9 Alcohol 1000 ml 
10 Litmus Paper (Red and Blue) 20 Booklets Each 
11 Sodium Chloride 2000gm 
12 Hydrochloric Acid  
(Both Dilute and              Concentrated) 
200 ml each 
13 Methyl Orange 2 Bottle 
14 Phenolphthalein 2 Bottle 
15 Lime Water  
16 Magnesium Ribbon 4 Coils 
17 Sulphur Powder 200 gm 
18 Zinc Granules 2 Bottle 
 
c) Biological Science requirements (for a batch of 40 students at any given time): 
 
S. No. Specimen Required Number 
1 Insectivorous Plants 3 
2 Hydrilla 2 
3 Model of different types of teeth 2 
4 Model of a Simple pendulum 2 
5 Life Cycle of Silkmoth 2 
6 Root Nodules (Rhizobium) 2 
 
  
=== PAGE 7 ===
 
d) Equipments and items Requirements (for a batch of 40 students at any given time): 
 
S. 
No. 
Permanent Slides Required Number 
1 Different Shapes of Bacteria (Bacilli, Cocci, Spirilla) 2 Each 
2 Amoeba 2 
3 Amoeba- Binary Fission  2 
4 Hydra  2 
5 Bread Mould  2 
6 Spirogyra  2 
7 Budding in Yeast  2 
8 Paramecium  2 
9 Chlamydomonas  2 
 
7. Safety guidelines  
 
In order to ensure the safety of students in Science Laboratories, the following provisions are 
mandatory: 
 
 List of general SOP applicable at all times 
 Two wide doors for unobstructed exits from the laboratory. 
 An adequate number of fire extinguishers near laboratory. 
 Periodically checking vulnerable points in the laboratory about the possibility of mishaps. 
 It should be ensured that gas fittings in the laboratory fulfill the desired norms and standards. 
 Periodical checking of electrical fittings/ insulations for replacement and repairs 
 Timely and repeated instructions to students for carefully handling chemicals and equipment 
in the laboratory. 
 Display of do’s and don’ts in the laboratory at prominent places. 
 Safe and secure storage of all chemicals and equipments. 
 Proper labelling and upkeep of chemicals and equipments. 
 Proper safety and protection provisions include a fume hood, goggles and gloves while doing 
practical work. 
 Careful supervision of students while doing practical work. 
 Advance precautionary arrangements to meet any emergencies. 
 Conduct any additional experimental work only under supervision and with due advance 
permission. 
 Availability of First Aid and basic medical facilities in the school. 
  
=== PAGE 8 ===
 
 General work procedure for students 
 
 When entering a laboratory, avoid touching equipment, chemicals, electrical and electronic 
devices, or other materials until you are instructed to do so. 
 The students should be careful when doing electricity experiments. 
 He/she should not touch any wires if his/her hands are wet, even for low voltage 
equipment. 
 Follow all written and verbal instructions carefully given by the teacher/ instructor. 
 Do not start any practical work unless you are clear about its directions. Ask your teacher before 
proceeding with the activity. 
 Be cautious at all times in the laboratory. Call the teacher immediately if you notice any risky 
conditions. 
 Never work alone in the laboratory. The presence of a teacher or supervisor is necessary. 
 In case of spillage, breakage or injury, report to the teacher instantly: stay calm. 
 Do not taste or smell any chemical present in the laboratory. 
 When removing an electrical plug from its socket, switch off and grasp the plug, not the  
electrical cord. Hands must be dry when touching an electrical switch, plug or outlet / socket. 
 Never return unused chemicals to their original container. 
 Do not take any chemicals away from the laboratory premises. 
 Do not immerse hot glassware in cold water, as the glassware may break. Put the heated 
glassware in a different place to be cooled. 
 Never look into a container that is being heated. Always observe containers from sideways. 
 If the Bunsen burner goes out accidentally, immediately turn off the control device/ gas supply. 
 Never leave a lit burner unattended. 
 Wash your hands with liquid soap and water on leaving the laboratory. 
 